CLI.md, before:

# CLI Documentation

This document describes the command-line interface for `my` (matrix-year).

## Commands

### `login` / `logout`

Authenticate a Matrix account and securely store credentials.

**Usage:**
```bash
my login [--user-id <@alice:example.org>]
my logout [--user-id <@alice:example.org>]
```

**Login Behavior:**
- Displays existing logged-in accounts for reference (if any).
- Prompts for homeserver, username and password to add a new account.
- Stores credentials locally in `.my/accounts/<account>/meta/credentials.json`.
- Persists session metadata to `.my/accounts/<account>/meta/session.json` and restores sessions automatically on subsequent runs.
- If cross-signing is enabled and the new device is unverified, offers SAS emoji verification or guidance for recovery-key verification.
- Supports multi-account: pass `--user-id` to target a specific account, otherwise an interactive prompt appears after showing existing accounts.

**Logout Behavior:**
- `--user-id` is optional. If omitted:
  - With a single account: prompts for confirmation and proceeds.
  - With multiple accounts: shows interactive selection including an "All" option.
- Asks for user confirmation displaying the user ID(s) before proceeding.
- Removes stored credentials and deletes local account data from `.my/accounts/<account>/`.

**Examples:**
```bash
my login --user-id @alice:example.org
my logout @alice:example.org
```

### `status`

Show the status of all logged-in Matrix accounts, including account IDs, homeserver, and session health. Useful for quickly checking which accounts are active and whether credentials are valid.

**Usage:**
```bash
my status
```

**Behavior:**
- Lists all accounts found in the data directory.
- For each account, displays:
  - Matrix user ID
  - Homeserver
  - Whether credentials are present and valid
  - Session health (restorable, needs login, etc.)
- Exits with nonzero status if no accounts are found or if any account is in an error state.

**Example:**
```bash
my status
```

### `--render`

Generate windowed reports (year, month, week, day, life) in one or more formats.

**Usage:**
```bash
my --render [formats] --json-stats <path> [--output <dir>]
```

**Arguments:**
- `--render [formats]` — Comma-separated list of formats to render (e.g., `md`, `md,html`). If omitted after flag or left empty, renders all available formats.
- `--json-stats <path>` — (Optional, required for now) Path to JSON statistics file. Stats **must** include `scope` (`year|month|week|day|life`) and `scope.key`.
- `--output <dir>` — (Optional) Output directory for generated reports. Defaults to current directory. Filenames are generated automatically based on the scope (e.g., `my-year-2025.md`, `my-month-2025-03.md`, `my-week-2025-W12.md`, `my-day-2025-03-15.md`, `my-life.md`).

**Examples:**

Render Markdown report:
```bash
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats.json --output examples
```

Render multiple formats:
```bash
my --render md,html --json-stats examples/example-stats.json --output reports
```

Render to current directory:
```bash
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats.json
```

Render other windows:
```bash
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats-2025-03.json --output examples
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats-2025-W12.json --output examples
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats-2025-03-15.json --output examples
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats-life.json --output examples
```

**Sample outputs:**
- [examples/my-year-2025.md](examples/my-year-2025.md)
- [examples/my-month-2025-03.md](examples/my-month-2025-03.md)
- [examples/my-week-2025-W12.md](examples/my-week-2025-W12.md)
- [examples/my-day-2025-03-15.md](examples/my-day-2025-03-15.md)
- [examples/my-life.md](examples/my-life.md)

---

## Development

### Running with Cargo

During development, you can run commands directly using `cargo run`:

```bash
cargo run -- --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats.json
```

The `--` separator tells Cargo to pass all following arguments to the `my` binary.

Commit message:

fix: restore 0600 file permissions for credentials.json
Address review feedback about multi-user OS security. File permissions
now restrict credentials.json to owner read/write only (0600 on Unix),
providing protection against other regular users on multi-user systems.

This follows standard Unix security practices used by browsers and
other local applications.

CLI.md, after:

# CLI Documentation

This document describes the command-line interface for `my` (matrix-year).

## Commands

### `login` / `logout`

Authenticate a Matrix account and securely store credentials.

**Usage:**
```bash
my login [--user-id <@alice:example.org>]
my logout [--user-id <@alice:example.org>]
```

**Login Behavior:**
- Displays existing logged-in accounts for reference (if any).
- Prompts for homeserver, username and password to add a new account.
- Stores credentials locally in `.my/accounts/<account>/meta/credentials.json` with restricted permissions (owner read/write only on Unix).
- Persists session metadata to `.my/accounts/<account>/meta/session.json` and restores sessions automatically on subsequent runs.
- If cross-signing is enabled and the new device is unverified, offers SAS emoji verification or guidance for recovery-key verification.
- Supports multi-account: pass `--user-id` to target a specific account, otherwise an interactive prompt appears after showing existing accounts.

**Logout Behavior:**
- `--user-id` is optional. If omitted:
  - With a single account: prompts for confirmation and proceeds.
  - With multiple accounts: shows interactive selection including an "All" option.
- Asks for user confirmation displaying the user ID(s) before proceeding.
- Removes stored credentials and deletes local account data from `.my/accounts/<account>/`.

**Examples:**
```bash
my login --user-id @alice:example.org
my logout @alice:example.org
```

### `status`

Show the status of all logged-in Matrix accounts, including account IDs, homeserver, and session health. Useful for quickly checking which accounts are active and whether credentials are valid.

**Usage:**
```bash
my status
```

**Behavior:**
- Lists all accounts found in the data directory.
- For each account, displays:
  - Matrix user ID
  - Homeserver
  - Whether credentials are present and valid
  - Session health (restorable, needs login, etc.)
- Exits with nonzero status if no accounts are found or if any account is in an error state.

**Example:**
```bash
my status
```

### `--render`

Generate windowed reports (year, month, week, day, life) in one or more formats.

**Usage:**
```bash
my --render [formats] --json-stats <path> [--output <dir>]
```

**Arguments:**
- `--render [formats]` — Comma-separated list of formats to render (e.g., `md`, `md,html`). If omitted after flag or left empty, renders all available formats.
- `--json-stats <path>` — (Optional, required for now) Path to JSON statistics file. Stats **must** include `scope` (`year|month|week|day|life`) and `scope.key`.
- `--output <dir>` — (Optional) Output directory for generated reports. Defaults to current directory. Filenames are generated automatically based on the scope (e.g., `my-year-2025.md`, `my-month-2025-03.md`, `my-week-2025-W12.md`, `my-day-2025-03-15.md`, `my-life.md`).

**Examples:**

Render Markdown report:
```bash
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats.json --output examples
```

Render multiple formats:
```bash
my --render md,html --json-stats examples/example-stats.json --output reports
```

Render to current directory:
```bash
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats.json
```

Render other windows:
```bash
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats-2025-03.json --output examples
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats-2025-W12.json --output examples
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats-2025-03-15.json --output examples
my --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats-life.json --output examples
```

**Sample outputs:**
- [examples/my-year-2025.md](examples/my-year-2025.md)
- [examples/my-month-2025-03.md](examples/my-month-2025-03.md)
- [examples/my-week-2025-W12.md](examples/my-week-2025-W12.md)
- [examples/my-day-2025-03-15.md](examples/my-day-2025-03-15.md)
- [examples/my-life.md](examples/my-life.md)

---

## Development

### Running with Cargo

During development, you can run commands directly using `cargo run`:

```bash
cargo run -- --render md --json-stats examples/example-stats.json
```

The `--` separator tells Cargo to pass all following arguments to the `my` binary.
