README.md, before:

# [my] — My year, on Matrix

`matrix-year` (CLI: `my`) generates a **year-in-review** for your Matrix account: activity stats, highlights, and maybe fun insights.

## ✨ What do you get?

From your Matrix account, `my` can generate:

- 📄 **Markdown report**
- 🌐 **Static HTML recap**
- 🎞️ **GIF / visual recap**
- 📊 **JSON stats**

Examples of stats:
- Messages sent, active days, peak months
- Activity by hour and weekday
- Top private rooms & DMs (public rooms excluded)
- Reactions your messages received
- Rooms you created during the year
- Fun stats and habits

## 🚀 CLI usage

### Crawl your data (incremental & resumable)

```bash
my crawl --user @alice:example.org
```

### Build yearly stats

```bash
my stats --year 2025
```

### Render your recap

```bash
my render md   --year 2025
my render web  --year 2025
my render gif  --year 2025
my render json --year 2025
```

## 📐 Stable stats model

- Spec: **`STATS_SPEC.md`**
- JSON Schema (Draft-07)
- Renderer-agnostic


## 🤝 Contributing / Agents

See **`AGENTS.md`**.

Commit message:

feat: windowed reports (year, month, week, day, life)
- Add scope abstraction with five window types: year, month (YYYY-MM), week (ISO), day (YYYY-MM-DD), life
- Extend schema with scope.type, scope.key, scope.label and activity buckets (by_week, by_day, by_year)
- Update Rust stats model: add Scope enum and struct; make year optional (deprecated)
- Adapt CLI filename generation to scope-based patterns (my-year-2025.md, my-month-2025-03.md, etc.)
- Make Markdown renderer scope-aware: dynamic titles, skip scope reference for life, conditionally render activity sections per window
- Create five example fixture JSONs with consistent fun facts and corresponding rendered outputs
- Remove messages_by_room_type table from rooms section
- Include message count in rooms intro (You sent X messages in Y rooms)
- Update stats_spec.md to clarify no backward compatibility required (regenerated on each change)
- Update AGENTS.md: reflect scope-based cache schema, note stats are deterministic but not versioned for BC

README.md, after:

# [my] — My year, on Matrix

`matrix-year` (CLI: `my`) generates a **year-in-review** for your Matrix account: activity stats, highlights, and maybe fun insights.

## ✨ What do you get?

From your Matrix account, `my` can generate:

- 📄 **Markdown report**
- 🌐 **Static HTML recap**
- 🎞️ **GIF / visual recap**
- 📊 **JSON stats**

Examples of stats:
- Messages sent, active days, peak months
- Activity by hour and weekday
- Top private rooms & DMs (public rooms excluded)
- Reactions your messages received
- Rooms you created during the year
- Fun stats and habits

> **Note:** `my` also supports monthly, weekly, daily, and life-to-date reports. See [examples/](examples/) for sample outputs.

## 🚀 CLI usage

### Crawl your data (incremental & resumable)

```bash
my crawl --user @alice:example.org
```

### Build yearly stats

```bash
my stats --year 2025
```

### Render your recap

```bash
my render md   --year 2025
my render web  --year 2025
my render gif  --year 2025
my render json --year 2025
```

## 📐 Stable stats model

- Spec: **`STATS_SPEC.md`**
- JSON Schema (Draft-07)
- Renderer-agnostic


## 🤝 Contributing / Agents

See **`AGENTS.md`**.
